Linux wireless GSoC 2009
========================

.. toctree::

   2009/add_ap_support_to_network_manager
   2009/automation_of_testing
   2009/geoclue_regulatory

This was our first year with Linux wireless GSoC projects. The original
project proposal can be seen at the `Linux Foundation GSoC 2009 page
<https://www.linuxfoundation.org/en/Google_Summer_of_Code_2009#802.11_Wireless>`__.
This page keeps track of the details of the projects, completed and
failed.

Completed projects
------------------

This projects were completed successfully.

-  :doc:`Add AP support to Network Manager <2009/add_ap_support_to_network_manager>`

Projects moved on to next year
------------------------------

* :doc:`2010/improve_wireless_roaming`
* :doc:`2010/wifi-test-nl80211`

Uncompleted projects
--------------------

These two projects were assigned slots but both students did not complete them.

* :doc:`2009/geoclue_regulatory`
* :doc:`2009/automation_of_testing`

General mentorship
------------------

Besides the mentors listed for each project you are encouraged to seek
help through the :doc:`Linux wireless mailing list <../mailinglists>`
and the :doc:`Linux wireless IRC channel <../../users/support>`.

Applying
--------

Google will publish the list of accepted mentoring organizations for
Google Summer of Code 2009 `on their GSOC 2009 page
<http://socghop.appspot.com/>`__ on Wednesday, March 18, 2009. Google
will then begin accepting applications from students beginning at 19:00
UTC on March 23, 2009. Please be sure to check out the `timeline
<http://socghop.appspot.com/document/show/program/google/gsoc2009/timeline>`__.
