Go back --> :doc:`Atheros Linux wireless drivers <atheros>` --> :doc:`ar9170 <ar9170>`

ar9170.fw
---------

This page is for the ar9170 open firmware. ar9170.fw is the firmware for the Atheros 802.11n USB chipset (AR9170). It was released by Atheros under the GPLv2 License with a lot of contributions made by the community. The firmware is maintained by the community.

This is NOT the same firmware as the one released officially by Atheros in a binary form under a restrictive license. If you are just looking to download a ready-to-use firmware, please see the page for the :doc:`ar9170 <ar9170>` driver for the links and instructions.

Get the source
--------------

You can get the source code from:

::

   http://git.sipsolutions.net/ar9170-fw.git

Toolchain
---------

You will need an SH2 toolchain, ar9170 firmware git tree allows you to build your own toolchain on the fly.

Build and install
-----------------

::

   make
   sudo make install

releases
--------

No official releases have been made yet as the source code was just released, a lot of cleanup is currently being done on the code. The firmware is still usable though if you compile it.

status
------

This firmware should get you connected with 802.11n networks and with networks requiring encryptions. At this point the firmware just works but could use enhancements.

bug reports
-----------

Bug reports are probably immature to report at this point, but feel free to give it a spin and let us know how it is going on the :doc:`linux-wireless IRC channel <../support>`.

patches
-------

Patches should be sent to the :doc:`linux-wireless mailing list <../../developers/mailinglists>`.
